Welcome back everybody and
this week we're going to go back to
more traditional quantum mechanics,
that is quantum mechanics described
in terms of the Schrodinger equation.
And today I'm going to solve
the Schrodinger equation
on a number of very important examples,
where we'll show you how quantum
potentials can capture quantum particles
that result in so called bound states.
So even though the solutions that we're
going to see, the examples we're going to
see are rather elementary from
the quantum mechanical point of view.
Well, otherwise,
they will require some thinking.
So these examples are going to give us
insight into some rather complicated and
fascinating problems such as for
instance, theory of superconductivity.
So in the end of the lecture today,
we're going to discuss our solutions
are relevant to the key phenomenon that is
responsible for super conductivity
that is so called Cooper pairs.
But before we get to this point
we need to go over the basics.
And so let me start first with
the problem of electron in a box.
I will define it in a second.
But even before that let me just talk
about what kinds of problems we want to,
we can't possibly study with
the Schrodinger Equation.
So here is a canonical
Schrodinger equation.
We have seen it already many times.
It's a time dependent
Schrodinger equation.
As we will see later, today, so actually
if the potential does not depend on time,
there is really no need to start
a time dependent Schrodinger equation.
So as we'll see, it can be transformed
into an eigenvalue problem for
the [INAUDIBLE] that we
will actually solve.
And in any case, so this first term in
the single particle mechanics anyways.
So this first drum on this Hamiltonian
is just the kinetic energy.
There is essentially,
it's a non-negotiable term.
The second term is something which
is sort of problem dependent which
determines the potential in which
our quantum particle moves.
So amazingly the variety of all
possible problems in single
particle quantum mechanics are contained
in this equation in a compact,
and they differ simply
by the choice of V of R.
But this compactness of
basically quantum mechanics
is a bit deceptive because it can give
you the impression that it can just solve
all possible quantum mechanical problems
in one go, just by solving this equation.
Well, this equation is
very rich equation and
depending on the choice of V(r) of
the potential at which the particle moves,
we can get completely
different physical situations.
And understanding these physical
situations would require,
dramatically different
mathematical approaches too.
However, very roughly,
what we can do, we can classify our
quantum potential by putting it in one
of two categories of either
an attractive or a repulsive potential.
Which, in the context of quantum physics,
the former are called potential wells and
the latter are called potential barriers.
So here let me present,
well sort of simple illustration of what
a typical potential well looks like.
So this is v of x.
It's in 1D quantum mechanics and
this is a 1D coordinate and
potential barrier would like
sort of opposite to it.
It would look like a hill.
And today,
we're going to focus our attention on
the physics of quantum potential wells.
Basically to give you the result
right from the onset,
I think most of you
probably already know this.
In potential wells, we're going to see
that the available energy levels for
the particle to occupy
With a negative energy.
So they're going to be quantized, that is,
the particle wouldn't be able to have any
arbitrary energy just like in classical
physics, where we could assign any energy.
We could put, let's say,
a ball at any level and
let it oscillate between
the turning points.
In quantum mechanics, let's say if we got
an electron in a potential well with this
landscape, we cannot assign
it an arbitrary energy.
So the available energies
are going to be quantized.
And finding these quantized
energy levels is one of the sort
of canonical problems that
we're going to solve.
But this business about finding the
quantized energy levels in an arbitrary
quantum well is in principle rather
complicated technically, and
the complexity of this exercise really
depends on the particular form
of the potential we're studying.
However, to see the appearance of these
quantum levels, in general we can focus on
the simplest examples of your facts and
that's what we're going to do now.
And perhaps the very simplest
example Is a potential which has so
called hard wall boundaries
which implies the falling.
So it basically means a potential
were beyond certain points.
Let's say x equals zero.
And x equals l.
So the value of the potential,
the effects is equal to infinity.
So there is no way the particle
can move beyond this point.
These are infinite walls.
And in between these two points, the value
of the potential is exactly equal to zero.
So which means that the particle's sort of
free to move between these two walls, but
it cannot go outside.
And this is what is known as
the problem of an electron in the box.
So as you probably can guess, the solution
of this problem you're going to complete
in the remainder of this segment
is going to involve certain
energy levels which are going to
form a discrete series.
So, it turns out that to understand
the phenomenon of quantization,
one does really need
quantum mechanics at all.
The quantization occur is in
classical physics all over the place.
And so here for instance, we have
an example of a very familiar object,
a guitar, which relies on quantization
in some sense of the wave lengths and
frequencies available in
its oscillating strings.
So here we have strings which are free to
oscillate between two points
where they're pinned down.
And those two points in
some sense correspond to the hard wall
boundaries in the corresponding quantum
mechanical problem that we're
going to study a little later.
The available wavelengths much depend
on the distance between these points,
these hard walls let's call it.
And the frequencies are related
to the available wavelengths by
the speed of sound.
Let's now think about,
what is the longest possible wavelength?
That we can induce in a finite string.
So these are basically
our hard walls again.
So this is our 0 and this is our L and
the hard walls in this
context essentially mean that
the strings cannot oscillate here.
So the displacement, let's call it u,
from this horizontal axis is exactly zero.
X equals zero and X equals L.
In other words, so,
we must have notes at these end points.
And the longest possible wave length
that achieves that is lambda equals 2L.
And this is sort of
the fundamental oscillation,
the longest possible wavelength
that we can induce on this string.
Because if we try to make this wavelength
even longer, it would imply essential that
we would have either no note in this
point or no note in this point.
And this will violate our boundary.
But there are of course many more wave
lengths that are possible that would
satisfy the proper boundary conditions and
we can achieve we can sort
of find these additional wave lengths or
higher harmonics as they're called
by putting additional nodes
in between these end points.
And so for instance this
example gives us a wavelength
which is exactly equal to the L to
the distance between the n points.
And we can continue this procedure and
generate many more wavelengths.
And these wavelengths are going to
follow this quantization rule if
you want with the corresponding solution,
while if you look at the snapshot of
an oscillating string at a certain time.
So the solution is simply going to
be given by the sin, well,
some amplitude which is
not really important.
Sin of 2 pi x over lambda sub n, and
of course, if x is equal to zero,
we're going to have the boundary, we're
going to satisfy the boundary condition,
x equals zero.
And if x is going to be equal to L,
this quantization rule is going to enforce
the other boundary conditions, namely that
the displacement vanishes at sequence L,
where we have a node here.
Now if we look at the corresponding
quantum mechanical problem.
So it essentially is very similar to
the problem of this oscillating string.
With the only difference being that
instead of putting an elastic string
between the two points, we put an electron
wave in between these two points.
But the wavelengths that are available for
the electrons, so
the electron cannot really move beyond
this hard wall rules right where
the probability of finding
the electron there is equal to zero.
Therefore, we must demand that,
well the probability of psi-squared
of x=0 and
L is identically equal to zero, Okay?
So, or
in other words psi itself is equal 0 and
this is much similar to having a node
at the endpoints of this string.
So if we solve this problem for
the electron, well,
which will involve in this case actually
solving the Schroedinger equation,
we're going to find exactly
the same wavelength.
And the wave function is actually
going to look exactly the same
as the displacement of the string.
So, there's absolutely no difference.
I just copy and pasted it exactly the same
equations, so only replacing u sub n
which is a displacement by psi of n which
is the wave function of the electron.
So this shows you that actually there is a
lot of analogy in quantization of electron
wave lengths and quantization of
wave length of classic objects,
elastic objects.
So the only difference, and an important
difference here, would be in how
the frequency, or the energy in the case
of electron, scale with the wavelength.
So here we discuss that the frequency
of the oscillation, which by the way
determines the sound that we actually
hear, scales linearly with the wavelength.
On the other hand we know that
the energy of the quantum particle of
just well kinetic energy is essentially a
free particle moving in between these two
points is going to be
p squared over 2n and
if we recall the de Broile
relation between the momentum and
the wave length which is 2 pi h
bar over lambda is equal to p.
So then we can regularly combine these two
results of the quantization of the wave
length and the scaling of the energy
to get the quantization of energy.
So if you put everything together
it is quantization rule and
the de Broglie relation we're going to
get the quantized energy levels,
e sub n where n is a positive
integer equal to pi squared,
h squared, n squared divided by
the l squared, the distance here
that corresponds to the momentum
squared times 1 over twice the mass.
So, in August, that interestingly
we solved the Schrodinger equation
without writing it down.
The only thing we used, is basically
was the boundary conditions, and
same analogy with classical physics,
along with the de Brogile relation.
But of course, one can solve it formally
and we'll show later how it works.
So, sadly one can not always
solve the string equation in
a simplistic way without writing it down.
So to understand why it happens we can
again use this guitar
sort of string analogy.
So if we push down on the string, so
we effectively shorten the distance
between this ends points and
the effective end points here and by doing
so we of course change the fundamental
wavelength and the quantization of
the wavelength and the frequencies.
This sort of results in different
sounds that we, produce this way.
But if we push not very hard, but
if we just touch the string here, so
this creates in sort of an infinite wall,
impenetrable wall for
the string to propagate.
Beyond this point,
it creates a finite barrier.
And to solve the wave equation,
for this string,
the classical wave equation in
the presence of such a small perturbation
is actually more complicated then solving
this equation for two hard walls.
And likewise, we're going to see actually
that the problem of a quantum mechanical
particle, when instead of the hard walls
we have let's say finite barrier here is
more complicated and it requires actually
a serious mathematical calculations
in solving the actual Schroedinger
equation which is a differential equation.
We're going to discuss in
the following segment.